---
layout: post
title:  "Do We Have Free Will?"
date:   2023-05-16 13:00:00 +0000
categories: maths
---

That is, do we have agency to make choices between different courses of action?

It would seem that we don't - everything there is is governed by the laws of physics, including our brains. 
These laws do not allow for non-deterministic outcomes (at least those outcomes that would be determined by "agency" as opposed to the laws of physics themselves). 
So nothing that goes on in our brains could escape from that. 
Our brains are algorithms (complex, but still algorithms) that take input and produce output. 
Given the exact same inputs (which includes everything perceived by our senses or that affects our brain function, that is, our body conditions, 
our surroundings, our history, the advices that we heard, our systems of values, our biases, and so on and on), we should expect the same outputs.

Moreover, there's no empirical observation that would tell us whether we have free will or not. 
Free will has no observable consequences - it's impossible to distinguish the actions of a human with free will from those of a human without it.

However, that doesn't resolve the question totally. If it is true that we don't have free will, why does it feel like we have free will? 
We must feel like that because it was evolutionarily advantageous to feel like that, but how come we feel like that? 
What is it in our brains that makes us feel like that? We can't fully answer the "do we have free will" question without answering that.

Our choice making is an algorithm that takes `(available options, values, conditions, etc etc)` and outputs `(chosen action)`. 
There's no extra degree of freedom ("soul", "agency" or whatever) that determines what the output will be. 
"Free will" is what it feels like to be that algorithm. The process that takes inputs to outputs feels like having free will.

**Q: Does that mean that we don't control ourselves? Or that we don't control our actions?**

Of course we do. Precisely, we control our actions through the laws of physics too - there's no other way.

**Q: So what is the point of making an effort, of weighting options, of doing all of the things that we should do, if in the end it's all pre determined by the laws of physics? What is my responsibility for my choices if they are all determined by the laws of physics?**

When people hear that the world is deterministic, they translate that to: "all actions except one are impossible." 
This seems to contradict their feeling of being free to choose any action. 
The notion of physics following a single line seems to contradict their perception of a space of possible plans to search through.

Possibility is in the mind, not in reality. Many things could happen, but only a single thing will possibly happen. 
That single thing is determined by the laws of physics.

But even though our actions are determined by the laws of physics, we don't know what they are until we take them. 
We have to go through the (sometimes challenging) process of executing our actions, being determined by the laws of physics is not enough for them to come into effect. 

The fact that we have to carry out that process, the fact that we determine our choices, is what gives us moral responsibility for our choices.

**Q: But how could it have been different? You're not the ultimate source of your decisions - the initial conditions of your brain are!**

One of these initial conditions, for example, is the education that your parents gave you. 
Does that means that your parents are responsible for your decisions? Of course not - 
only you control your decisions, even if "You" is (also) a result of how your parents educated you.

There is not such a thing as a single cause for any event. 
This sensation of freedom occurs when I believe that I can carry out, without interference, each of multiple actions, 
such that I do not yet know which of them I will take, but I am in the process of judging their consequences according to my emotions and morals. 
But the notion of freedom as being the sole cause of your actions is incorrect.

> You're not free to choose. But you're responsible for your actions.
